[music]
We utterly deny all outward wars and strife,
and fighting with outward weapons,
for any end, or under any pretense whatsoever;
this is our testimony to the world...
This is the "peace testimony,"
first proclaimed in 1660 to king charles ii of england
by a group of religious seekers led by george fox
and calling themselves the "children of light",
or "publishers of truth."
To their critics they were known as "Quakers,"
a derisive nickname that they unabashedly acknowledged
as they were known for trembling under the influence
of the holy spirit in their worship meetings.
Ultimately, they would officially name themselves
"The Religious Society of Friends."
Their visionary leader, George Fox, wrote in 1683:
"God, who made all,
pours out his spirit upon all men and women in the world,
in the days of his new covenant,
yea, upon whites and blacks, moors, and turks, and Indians,
Christians, Jews, and gentiles, that all with the spirit of God,
might know God and the things of God,
and serve and worship, in spirit and truth".
Be patterns, be examples in all countries,
places, islands, nations, wherever you come,
that your carriage
and life may preach among all sorts of people,
and to them;
then you will come to walk cheerfully over the world,
answering that of God in every one.
That of God in everyone as it was originally used,
really referred to people being made
in the image and likeness of God.
We all share the same Father with the same parents.
We're all children of God,
we're all children of the same God.
We need to recognize that that's what we need to be responding to
in other people, is that common humanity
that we have, the inward light of Christ.
And just as the light from the sun
allows us to see with our eyes, our outward eyes,
we have inward eyes
and when we are illuminated by that inward light of God,
we can see our spiritual condition
and understand what it is God's calling on us to do.
As the movement grew in number and momentum,
that inner light led Quakers to pivotal roles
in many of the most transformative moments
of the last four centuries.
Quakers such as William Penn, Susan B. Anthony, Lucretia Mott,
John Woolman and George Cadbury
have achieved a degree of fame,
but less is known about thousands of other Friends,
such as those from the American midwest,
whose faithfulness to Quaker ideals
positively impacted the larger society.
And these are the previously untold stories
of some of those architects of peace and equality.
Quakers left England in the 17th century
to establish a colony in the new world -
William Penn's "Holy Experiment" -
inspired by the idea of living where they could be governed
according to their faith.
Penn had been given the land by King Charles II
to settle a large family debt.
So in 1682, he sails across the ocean
with a group of colonists, most of whom are Quakers.
But he doesn't say to the people already living there,
"This is mine."
What he says is, "I am going to buy it.",
he says this not only to the Swedes and the Dutch.
He says it to the Indians as well.
He says, "This is land that we want to settle on.
"we recognize it as your land
and we will purchase it from you,"
and begins, the first are the number of treaties
that Pen and his sons make with the Indians to buy land
that the king has already given to Penn.
After an encounter with Penn,
Tamanend, a native american delaware chief, declared:
"We will live in love with William Penn
and his children as long as the creeks and rivers run,
and while the sun, moon, and stars endure.
Penn writes this constitution
allowing people freedom to worship,
abolishing the death penalty except in some very--
I think if you engaged in treason you still be executed,
but beyond that, this was an amazingly liberal document
that he put together.
The Quaker colony, Pennsylvania,
was open to all and governed with laws
based on equality, truth, simplicity and peace.
Peace requires justice, justice requires law.
law requires government,
not only within nations but also between nations.
~~ william penn, 1693.
If you could only build a state
where people would be free,
they could have freedom of religion,
they could have freedom to express themselves,
there could be equality,
women could be as equal as men, could have the same rights,
could do the same things as men,
there would be no need to own slaves,
that each in their own way would give to the community,
that you would have a just government,
that would look out for everyone within the society.
Unfortunately, by the time of the American revolution,
there were more non-Quakers than Quakers in Pennsylvania,
and the Holy Experiment came to an end
as Quakers were voted out of office
or left office rather than participate in decisions
related to war-making.
He thought he was going to establish a utopia,
a heaven on earth and found out that the tough realities of life
really get in the way.
But he did create this colony, he created this model.
We have the model of religious freedom
that Penn establishes in Pennsylvania.
And the constitution of the Unites States,
in some ways draws on things that he wrote in the 1680s,
almost 100 years earlier.
Though they were no longer a majority in Pennsylvania,
Quakers had spread throughout the American colonies
with substantial settlements in rhode island, New Jersey,
Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia.
As the colonies in the new land developed,
slavery became a part of the economic system.
But Quakers were to follow a different path.
Through the 1700s, friends urged their members who owned slaves
to free them and make provisions for their welfare
and by 1784 virtually no Quakers owned slaves.
The slave economy became strong in the south,
so in 1806 my family group of Quakers
move from the North Carolina Piedmont area, to Ohio.
They did not want to raise their children in that slave society.
So it was a matter of conscious and also a matter of economics,
a matter of looking for a life that would be better
for their community and their families.
Appalled by the cruelty of slavery around them,
and attracted to the possibility
of living where slavery was prohibited,
many southern Quakers began moving
to the northwest territory,
settling first on land that now includes
the states of Ohio and Indiana.
In 1787 congress passed the northwest ordinance,
which was to provide for the organization of government
and settlement of the lands north of the Ohio river.
What was probably the best element of the ordinance;
however, was its provision that neither slavery
nor involuntary servitude
would ever exist in the lands of the northwest territory.
And Friends are drawn toward territories
where slavery is illegal.
Daniel Boone, who grew up a pennsylvania Quaker,
was among those who helped friends move west
in search of a place to live in peace and equality.
Let peace, descending from her native heaven,
bid her olives spring amidst the joyful nations;
and plenty, in league with commerce,
scatter blessings from her copious hand!
Daniel Boone, 1784.
In 1799, two Quaker families
from bush river, south Carolina, settled on "Military Lands"
in southwestern Ohio, just north of fort Washington,
the site of what would, in a few years,
become the thriving river port town of Cincinnati.
In 1803, joined by more migrating Friends,
they established the first formally recognized
Quaker meeting for worship, or "church",
in southwestern Ohio:
Miami monthly meeting in the village of Waynesville.
And that same year, something was to happen
back in bush river, south Carolina
that would open the floodgates for Quaker migration
to the northwest territory.
Zachariah Dix, a Quaker,
described by those who heard him speak,
as "a powerful rhapsodical preacher"
with "prophetic insight in an unusual degree,"
delivered a disturbing message.
By the 1790s, Friends had come to believe
that Zacharias had a gift of prophecy.
That he could see into people's minds
and understand what their secret spiritual states were.
And that he had foreshadowings of the future.
As friends recorded their memories of his preaching
decades later, what Zacharias had to say to them
was something like this, "Woe unto thee bush river.
The flower of thy glory has faded.
Get thee, hence, out of this land of egyptian slavery
and darkness unto the free lands of the northwest."
And within a few years, a Quaker community that had numbered,
probably close to 1000 people,
was fewer than a hundred left in south Carolina.
The Quakers who came here to the midwest
were those who were maybe more risk-takers.
They left homes,
well-established farms and villages
and families back east and moved west.
A lot of Quakers stayed on the east,
you know, where their farms and families were,
and they did good work there,
but the ones who came west,
took all sorts of risks and chances,
and it strikes me, we may know less about them
because they were doers more than writers.
They didn't necessarily sit and write down what they had done,
they were out there just doing it.
A large number of Quakers continued migrating
to present-day Indiana and Ohio just like those from bush river,
faithfully following guidance from their inner light.
Quakers wherever they form communities,
first formed a meeting for worship.
The next thing they did was to open a school for their children.
Those Quaker schools are often admitting non-Quaker students.
And some of them gained a reputation as being
some of the best secondary schools in the midwest.
After statehood in 1803,
a public school system was set up,
but black children were not admitted to it.
Even though black landowners were forced to pay taxes
that subsidized the public schools,
their children could not attend those schools.
So if black children were to be educated,
that means that their parents or sympathetic whites
had to make that possible.
In Harveysburg,
which is just a few miles from Waynesville,
there was a Quaker meeting there,
and there were two Quakers,
Elizabeth Harvey and her husband.
They started the first for children of color in Ohio,
which was early and really unheard of at the time,
and highly frowned on and got a lot of criticism from people
who weren't friends.
One of the things that really feeds freedom
is not a place to hide but a place where you can learn,
a place where you can become a part of the economic community,
build a home for your family,
and then send your children back to school.
And Harveysburg created a school for black students
and then even hire black and white teachers.
And so it was important because it started at the base.
For early friends of course,
this is just plain scripture.
Equality is...
you look in the epistle from Paul
and it says in christ there is no male or female,
there is no Greek or Jew, there is no slave or free.
If we are part of the body of christ, we are all the same
and so the social distinctions that were made
and still are made to a degree
between people of different backgrounds
and different genders, those are all irrelevant.
Those are all outward things, but internally we are all,
as I said, children of God,
and are all equally children of God.
As more and more of the country
began relying upon slave labor for productivity and cost savings,
Quakers throughout the northwest territory
continued to make the difficult and dangerous choice
of supporting freedom for all.
Christopher Anthony, a founding member of the Quaker meeting
in Cincinnati, Ohio,
was one of many Quakers to give up his reliance on slave labor.
Mary P. Hart was Christopher Anthony's granddaughter, 
and fortunately, she had the wherewithal to share her memories
of the meeting house and some of the oral history of her family
and how they came to arrive in Cincinnati.
"The household goods came in Wagons
and with them a family of negroes.
The man was a descendant of a slave of grandfather's
before grandfather joined the Society of Friends,
at which time he set all his slaves free".
~ Mary P. Hart.
Even for Quakers
living in the slavery free northwest territory,
it was impossible to avoid being drawn into
the most contentious debate in the history of our nation.
Many Friends combined intellect and creativity
to overcome opposition to their work for peace and equality.
Levi and Catherine Coffin are prime examples
of such moral ingenuity.
In the 1830s and 1840s,
the town of newport in Wayne county, Indiana,
had a reputation as being one of the most radical
anti-slavery centers in the United States.
It was widely known that hundreds of fugitive slaves
had passed through newport;
most of them through the Coffin home,
and he estimated that,
I believe, in the course of their lives
from 1826 to 1865 they had aided somewhere between
two and three thousand fugitives.
And to the best of his knowledge none of them
was ever seized and returned to slavery.
Levi Coffin was an effective conductor
on the underground railroad
not just because he was a committed abolitionist,
but also because he was a smart, committed abolitionist.
He knew that if slave capturers invaded newport or even his home,
they would have the force of law behind them.
And so he tried to think of ways
that he might be able to outwit them.
and you can see three examples of that here at the house.
The first is the well, which is inside.
And of course, that would have been convenient.
But it also had the advantage that snoopy neighbors who might
not be sympathetic would never be able to notice just how much
water the coffins were drawing for their own use
or for the 18 fugitive slaves that they might have with them,
at any given time.
In the attic, there is a hiding place,
one where people could have been concealed, if necessary.
they also have a false bottom wagon,
which would have been another effective way
to transport fugitive slaves.
They would have been particularly in danger
when they're on the open road.
So if you think that slave catchers may be on your trail,
the false bottom wagon is an excellent way
to transport a freedom seeker.
I think, to me, it's a good example
of combining practicality with a moral witness.
He didn't try and hide from the sheriff.
He was just open about it
and this is what real civil disobedience is about.
Civil disobedience is saying this law is wrong.
I am not going to follow it
and doing it out where people can catch you if they want to.
He didn't hide the fact that he was, not just a conductor,
on the underground railroad,
he was described at that time as the president
of the underground railroad
and he was described that way publicly.
In his memoir,
Levi Coffin recounts a conversation
with a man who disapproved
of his helping slaves escape from their masters.
I told him I had read in the bible when I was a boy,
that it was right to feed the hungry and clothe the naked,
and to minister to those who had fallen among thieves
and were wounded,
but that no distinction in regard to color
was mentioned in the good book,
so in accordance with its teachings
I had received these fugitives and cared for them.
I then asked: "Was I right, friend, in doing so?"
He hesitated and seemed at a loss how to reply.
I continued: "How does thy bible read?
Was it not as I have said?"
"Yes, he answered, it reads somehow so."
He evidently wished to change the subject.
~ Levi Coffin.
In addition to helping fugitives escape from slavery,
Coffin and other abolitionists worked to undermine
its economic foundation,
buying and selling products such as cotton and sugar
from plantations that hired free laborers instead of using slaves.
In 1846, a group of abolitionists
decided to establish a free labor wholesale warehouse
in Cincinnati and urged Levi Coffin to oversee its operation.
in the spring, Levi and Catherine Coffin
moved from their home in Newport, Indiana
to Cincinnati, Ohio.
Throughout their years in Cincinnati,
the Coffins also helped those who sought freedom
by providing opportunities for education,
teaching simple skills denied those oppressed by slavery.
People like Levi Coffin
not only provided you with shelter
but then provided you with hope.
In helping black people learn to read, write
in the basement of union baptist church, that's freedom.
And even if they catch you and take you back
they don't own you anymore.
Coffin and other people like him understood that physical freedom
with no job and no way to take care of your family
is just another form of slavery.
Another Cincinnati friend
who took the testimony against slavery particularly to heart
was mordecai morris white.
His maternal grandfather was a wealthy plantation owner,
and in 1846, when Morris White was only 16 years old,
he inherited a large estate from his grandfather,
including a number of slaves.
When he was in his early twenties
and living in Cincinnati as a young businessman,
the realization that he was a slave owner began to bother him,
so he made the journey on horseback
all the way down to North Carolina,
registered his slaves
to establish his ownership and his ability to free them,
and then at three in the morning started on a journey
back to the midwest.
When he got to Norfolk, he was offered $10,000 in gold
for his gang of slaves, and turned it down.
The personal property value
of the six million slaves in the south was worth more money
than all the factories and inventory of everything up north.
And so, when you ask that that be taken away and given away,
that would be like telling procter & gamble
to give away all their soap.
We don't realize how much value there was
and we don't have any idea of what it was like
to have the courage to run away.
Eventually Mordecai White's group made its way
to Raysville, Indiana, a settlement of Quakers
and free people of color where white had relatives.
There, White rented and furnished two houses
for his former slaves, and found jobs for the men chopping wood,
making fencing rails, and other employment
that would allow them to provide for themselves.
It's a risk to let your life speak what you believe.
So it doesn't matter what you say you believe,
if your actions are showing a different belief, then it doesn't matter.
But it is risky.
Quakers who did not directly protect
and guide slaves to freedom on the underground railroad
found other ways to contribute, such as cincinnati friend,
achilles pugh and clinton county Quakers, Isaac and Sarah Harvey.
Pugh owned a printing company
that published, "The Philanthropist"
that was written by James Birney.
Birney was like Levi Coffin and like John Rankin from Ripley.
And that Birney was a southerner,
Birney was the son of a slave owner from Danville, Kentucky
who said this isn't right.
And so here is a guy of privilege
who has a strong moral base
and just turns his back on wealth
and started writing this paper,
and some of the citizens of Cincinnati burned his press twice
and dumped it here in the ohio river.
What's worse they decided to go
to achilles pugh's house that night
to make sure that he didn't have
any more printing equipment handy.
And it had to have been a terrifying experience,
to have this angry mob at your front door step,
with your wife and your children there in your home.
Fortunately they didn't commit any violence.
And he could have said to himself,
"This is too dangerous.
I am not going to do this anymore."
Instead he went to his printing press,
literally picked up the pieces,
and continuing publishing the philanthropist.
There are certain individuals who exemplify
what it means to be a Quaker,
and what it has meant from the beginning,
and one of the qualities is a degree of faithfulness
to leading, to communicating
or being communicated with God and listening.
And Isaac and Sarah Harvey are a good example of that.
In the late summer of 1862,
he was plowing in his field
and can you imagine walking behind horses and a plow
and that must be a very meditative kind of experience, you know.
So he was doing this and he heard a voice that said,
"Go to washington and talk to the president."
And he said, I don't --
he didn't know whether the voice was outside or inside
but he said, "I hear you."
So he unhitched his horse and took care of his horses,
went to the house and said to his wife Sarah,
"Will you go to washington with me to see the president?"
And she in her Quaker way says, "Who sends thee?"
And he says, "The Lord."
So of course she's ready to go with him and they do.
The civil war was underway
and the country was divided and devastated,
by both war and slavery.
But Isaac Harvey was convinced
God had given him a message to share
that might provide the solution.
So Sarah and Isaac Harvey get off the train in Washington DC.
They don't know the city;
they don't know anything about it.
They look across the street,
and there is a fellow standing over there by a street lamp.
So they go over to him and ask directions to the white house;
they have come to see the president.
So he asks them a few questions
and it turns out that he is secretary of the treasury,
Salmon P. Chase.
He is from Cincinnati;
he had served several different political offices,
including governor of Ohio.
When he finds out they are from Wilmington,
and he knows they're Quakers, and he knows the area,
he takes them, he says, "Come with me; I will get you settled."
He takes them to a boarding house or something,
and finds them a room,
and he sets up an appointment with them
to go see Abraham Lincoln.
So they went into the waiting room
and many people reading the newspaper
because the battle of antietam had just been fought
and the north had won
but there had many, many causalities.
So they waited thinking certainly they would probably
never get in with all these important things going on.
But at their appointed time, president Lincoln called them in
and they reported that president Lincoln picked up his chair
and came over and sat between them
so that he could talk to them more personally.
So they talk for about half an hour
and at the end of that time
president Lincoln signed a note
saying that they had visited with him,
that they had comforted him and dated it.
I take pleasure in asserting that I have had
profitable intercourse with friend Isaac Harvey
and his good wife Sarah Harvey.
May the Lord comfort them as they have sustained me.
~ Abraham Lincoln - September 19, 1862.
About two days after the Harvey visit,
the first draft of what would become
the emancipation proclamation was given to the congress.
In this preliminary version
Lincoln includes in his second paragraph
almost exactly what Isaac Harvey had suggested,
and that is that the government,
the US government purchase slaves from the south.
On September 22, 1862, Lincoln issued the following:
"That it is my purpose,
upon the next meeting of congress
to again recommend the adoption of a practical measure
tendering pecuniary aid to the free acceptance
or rejection of all slave states, so called,
the people whereof may not then be in rebellion
against the united states and which states
may then have voluntarily adopted,
or thereafter may voluntarily adopt,
immediate or gradual abolishment of slavery
within their respective limits".
And the wonderful thing that happens
when you are faithful like that,
is that you are able to do things
you shouldn't be able to do.
You shouldn't be able to just arrive,
get off the train in Washington DC
and make your way to see president Lincoln.
And when you have that kind of confidence,
you are not alone and you can...
you accomplish incredible things,
and that's along with this idea of George Fox
when he said "Let your life so preach."
In other words, your life will-- what you do,
if you are faithful and tuned in and listening
and you act on them,
your life will speak what you believe.
So it's a powerful message to watch someone live a faith
and not just say it.
Since the 17th century
the official Quaker position has been that all wars and fighting
are contrary to the will of God
and that friends as faithful christians, can never bear arms
to deprive fellow human beings of their lives,
even in self-defense.
The civil war is different.
They see the confederacy
as committed to the defense of slavery
and that, in Quaker minds,
makes it absolutely immoral, indefensible.
So, that's the choice that friends are facing.
If we truly accept and believe that there is indeed
that of God in every person, then we must be a peacemaker.
We must give full justice and equality to every person
and seek the peace and justice that the world needs
and that the spirit requires of us.
Just as the country was divided, so were Quakers.
Torn between their abhorrence of slavery
and their testimony of peace,
a number of young Quaker men joined the union army.
A larger number, however,
elected not to participate in violence;
for this they were labeled as cowards
and faced derision and humiliation by society-at-large.
Although Quakers were not willing to kill for their principles,
they were willing to suffer, and even die for them.
The 1864 Friends discipline for Quakers in Indiana
and southwestern Ohio acknowledged the challenges
of the peace testimony in wartime:
"If during the common course of their life,
Friends are attacked, insulted, and persecuted,
they ought to suffer wrong, to revenge no injury,
to return good for evil and love their enemies.
So also, should it happen that they are exposed
to the more extraordinary calamities of war,
their conduct must continue to be guided by the same principles.
If the sword of the invader be lifted up against them,
the precept is still at hand, that they resist not evil.
If the insults and injuries of the carnal warrior
be heaped upon them,
they are still forbidden to avenge themselves,
and still commanded to pray for their persecutors.
If they are surrounded by a host of enemies,
however violent and malicious those enemies may be,
christian love must still be unbroken, still universal.
While withstanding verbal
and sometimes physical persecution,
Friends found ways to contribute solutions while avoiding violence.
For instance, Mary J. Taylor,
clerk of the women's meeting in Cincinnati,
organized assistance for soldiers who were encamped
in Garfield Park, and her son, Dr. William H. Taylor,
provided medical services to the wounded.
Other Cincinnati Area Friends
were challenged to action as well.
Endeavor, as way may open,
to relieve in some measure,
the colored people now at or near Cairo,
who are without a home in consequence of the war
now existing in our beloved country,
and who, by the laws of the land,
are most likely entitled to freedom from slavery...
at this time there are about 4,000 persons,
principally women and children, at or near that place,
the able bodied men being mostly employed
in the opposing armies, leaving their helpless fathers,
mothers, wives, and children without the means of support.
donne: there were slaves
who were caught in the middle of battlegrounds.
so there was dreadful suffering among the people who were slaves
and were now according to the law, freedmen,
but they were not free from suffering and poverty and so on.
narrator: Quakers formed various committees to provide support
for those suffering because of the war,
including the indiana yearly meeting committee
on the concerns of the people of color
and the committee for contraband relief,
which included representatives from cincinnati friends meeting,
achilles pugh and murray m. shipley, among others.
as the war came to a close and for years to follow,
Quakers were involved
with picking up the broken pieces of society
and working to rebuild it.
sabrina: according to some sources, during the civil war,
murray shipley was involved
in helping to establish schools in the south
which involved going down the mississippi river,
under fire at times,
from either of the union forces or the confederate forces
so that he could bring relief to the people in those areas.
donne: levi coffin and other Quakers in the cincinnati area
made trips down to alabama and mississippi
to see what was going on.
they came back, they raised money and funds
and they started this western freedmen's commission
to continue to get food and clothing and supplies
and relief for the suffering people.
one of the first things they did,
besides feed and clothe the slaves,
was build schools and start teaching them,
because they understood that they would have a better chance
of surviving in this new world, whatever it was going to be,
to survive, they were going to have to have
some of those basic skills.
carl: after the civil war,
you had four and a half million people of african descent,
most of whom had no formal education.
and coffin not only helped them in the process of getting away,
at least 2000, but he then helped an even a larger number
with the kind of programs that the freedman's bureau set up:
establishment of schools,
establishment of social services that people with nothing,
needed to begin to become full-fledged citizens.
narrator: when coffin died in 1877,
his service was held at cincinnati friends meetinghouse.
four of the eight pallbearers were freed black men.
one of the speakers was rev. dr. rust,
secretary of the freedmen's aid society
of the methodist episcopal church.
dr. rust: levi coffin had too great a mission
to spare any time to take care of himself,
and God took care of him.
he was an honest, wise, and judicious man -
wise in selecting the most practical and judicious methods.
he was a brave and courageous man.
it would take less bravery to go up to the cannon's mouth
than to do the work he did.
as he walked through the streets,
he was hooted at and threatened by mobs.
the battlefield has no such illustrations of heroism
as he exhibited every day.
reverend dr. rust, 1877.
narrator: the african american community in cincinnati
held fund raisers to build a memorial for him,
but it was Quaker practice to maintain simplicity
and equality even in death.
in accordance with his wishes,
catherine coffin had her husband buried
in an unmarked grave in the meetings cemetery.
when catherine coffin died in 1881,
she was also buried in an unmarked grave
in the friends cemetery.
twenty years later, in 1901, cincinnati friends meeting
was informed that "persons not in membership with us
"desire to erect a monument to the late levi coffin
on our lot in spring grove cemetery."
cincinnati friends meeting granted permission
to erect a monument
so long as friends approved of the inscription.
among a few simple headstones in the Quaker section
of spring grove cemetery, stands a single six-foot marker,
dedicated in a ceremony on may 30, 1902.
inscribed on the monument are the following words:
female Quaker 2: levi coffin, died 9th mo. 16, 1877
in his 79th year, a christian philanthropist.
catherine coffin died 5th mo 22,
her work well done.
noble benefactors aiding thousands to gain freedom -
a tribute from the colored people of cincinnati.
[music]
narrator: after the civil war, another group that garnered
the attention and sympathies of Quakers
were native americans,
specifically, the cheyenne, wichita and comanche tribes.
thomas: one of the delicious ironies of american history
was that when general ulysses s. grant
became president in 1869,
he decided that the u.s. government
needed a new indian policy.
one that emphasized peace.
one that took the administration of indian affairs
away from the army
and private contractors and agents who were often corrupt,
and turned it over to the churches.
people who presumably would be humanitarian.
who would practice peace on earth, good will toward men.
narrator: in 1869, when a group of Quakers went to see
president elect grant and made the suggestion
that instead of soldiers as indian agents,
people of faith be appointed,
grant listened attentively to the Quakers, and responded:
president grant: gentlemen, your advice is good.
I accept it.
now give me the names of some friends for indian agents
and I will appoint them.
if you can make Quakers out of the indians
it will take the fight out of them.
let us have peace.
ulysses s. grant.
narrator: thus, president ulysses s. grant
was led to pursue what became known as the "Quaker policy,"
the appointment of friends and other clergy
to oversee the corruption-ridden bureau of u.s. indian affairs,
and to act as "indian agents"
across the country,
distributing funds and supplies
to tribes who were losing more and more of their land
to settlers from the east,
and being forced to live on reservations.
it is believed that much of the motivation
for involving the Quakers was their positive reputation
among native american communities.
mary: now, william penn started that.
when he came to pennsylvania,
he made treaties with the indians.
these treaties were not broken.
they purchased land,
they tried to be as honest as they could
and as equal and fair to the native-americans.
so, that tradition was handed down through the society.
and they built schools, helped them build mills
and provided things
so that the native-americans could establish their own homes
and make a life for themselves.
narrator: once again, many of those involved
in the effort, came from the midwest.
cincinnati friend murray shipley served as chairman
of the associated executive committee of friends
on indian affairs,
and other members of cincinnati meeting were appointed
as indian agents including the indomitable harriet steer,
who spent several months with tribes in missouri,
and achilles pugh, who traveled to kansas and oklahoma territory
with two other friends on the associated executive committee.
initially, Quakers seemed to have the support
of the general public in their work with the plains tribes.
the cincinnati commercial tribune reported:
newspaper reporter: the Quaker agents are unwearied
in their efforts for the amelioration
of the indians' condition,
and honest in dispensing the rations
and annuities they are entitled to receive.
under the old system, the agents seldom lived with the tribes,
while the new agents abide with them;
and this is a great advantage.
cincinnati commercial tribune september 23, 1869.
narrator: however, many western settlers
were not fans of the experiment.
thomas: many of them were of the school:
the only good indian is a dead indian.
when they saw Quakers coming in urging justice
for native americans,
pointing out how very often local officials,
white settlers, were stealing from native americans,
encroaching on their lands,
withholding government funds that were rightly theirs,
this did not endear Quakers to those people.
so soon, washington was being inundated by complaints
from settlers that the Quakers were completely unrealistic
and that they were endangering the lives of settlers.
narrator: unfortunately, the trust placed in the Quakers
by president grant was not shared by officials
in the administration of rutherford b. hayes.
in 1879, encountering antagonism
and lack of cooperation by government officials,
Quakers withdrew from government sponsored work
and instead directed their efforts
toward establishing Quaker meetings,
building and staffing schools on reservations,
and maintaining relationships that continue today.
[music]
narrator: in 1896, when there were rumors of war
between the united states and great britain, murray shipley,
one of three recorded ministers at cincinnati friends meeting,
along with william h. taylor and anna m. johnson,
thought it provided:
murray: a great opportunity to proclaim
the principles of our society in opposition to all war,
and our advocacy of peaceful means
of adjusting all international difficulties.
murray shipley, 1896.
narrator: and he added that the aim of the friends was:
murray: not to translate christ's teachings
into a free rendering adapted to the customs of the day,
but to uphold his standard
and let the world become not only anti-slavery, but anti-war.
narrator: this optimistic 19th century hope was short lived.
instead, in the next century, Quakers everywhere
found themselves repeatedly challenged
to uphold the peace testimony
with its underpinnings of equality, truth and simplicity.
paul: war breaks out in 1914 in england first.
there's a problem because friends in england,
Quakers in england are clear that they are pacifists.
what they do in england is to establish
the friends ambulance service, which was a medical corps,
independent of the army.
young men, principally Quakers but not exclusively Quakers,
who would volunteer to drive ambulances
and serve as medics at the front.
donne: so rufus jones and james babbitt and henry cadbury
and some other Quaker leaders at the time,
decided that they needed a similar organization
for american Quakers so that they could do something,
so they could serve without serving in the military's way.
narrator: it was then, in 1917,
that the american friends service committee, or afsc,
was formed, to feed, clothe,
and provide aid to the victims of war.
ruth: if you look at the uniforms
they looked exactly like the uniforms
that the american military were wearing in that conflict,
and that was because they were actually buying
surplus army uniforms,
and outfitting these young men in this.
so when you see the uniforms they have on the sleeve
the red and black star, which was adopted as the logo
for the american friend service committee.
donne: and there were lot of young Quakers
and other members of peace churches like the mennonite
and the church of the brethren who did not want to go fight.
they were willing to serve, they were willing to die,
but they didn't, they couldn't kill.
so while there were bombs still falling in france,
american Quakers and british Quakers
were rebuilding farmhouses
and helping the people whose whole towns had been destroyed.
Quakers went in there and were rebuilding,
even as the destruction was still happening.
narrator: one of those devoted members
of the american friends service committee
was wilmington, ohio native, luther warren.
ruth: luther warren tells this amazing powerful story
about spending the day with this french family
and at this point, all that is left of this family
is grandma, mom, and a little girl,
and so luther and a couple of his partners
are working together to build this home for this family.
they are so grateful to have this home,
to have a roof over their heads again.
luther and the men leave to go back to their camp
and find out first thing in the morning
that the battle lines have shifted
and so they have to go back to this same family
and evacuate them from this home that they just built.
what's really amazing about this story is luther warren,
maynard mckay, mark mcmillan
all of these young men from this area
they're having, first of all, these cultural experiences
that farm boys from southwest ohio
have never had before.
but to think about the courage that it took,
to say "no, I don't believe that that is something
"that I can participate in
and so this is what I am going to choose to do instead."
and then to know that they were in just as much danger
as the young man who were carrying rifles.
neil: some of them worked as medics
or in the hospitals, that and other functions,
but hospital work, and this was common to work with refugees
and children and young mothers,
a kind of focus on that kind of relief.
I like this combination: trying to make changes
that will have long term and broad effects
the american friend service committee has done that.
narrator: according to wallace t. collett,
who served as chairman
of the american friends service committee in the 1970s,
its organizers in 1917
were inspired by a quotation from william penn:
william: let us then try what love will do;
for if men did once see we love them,
we should soon find they would not harm us.
narrator: though the great war came to a close in 1918,
the work of the american friends service committee continued.
ruth: something close to a million children a day
for a number of years,
were being fed by this relief work in europe.
that work had a powerful legacy
because they weren't just feeding french children,
they were feeding german children as well.
they were feeding anyone who needed to be fed.
there is a man named joe volk, who, for a number of years,
was the executive secretary
of the friend's committee on national legislation.
in the 1970s and 1980s he was traveling in germany,
and they were working on east-west relations
and anti-nuclear weapons work,
but he was talking with some officials
high up in the german government.
and at some point was just kind of really personally amazed
that these people were so willing and open
to talk with him,
when they weren't willing and open to talk with other people
and so he finally asked somebody, what is it?
why me?
why us?
why the american friend service committee?
why are you talking to us and you wont talk to anyone else?
and this german official said because I wouldn't be here
if you hadn't fed my parents.
and so we are talking about a generation after, right,
this guy's parents had been fed by Quakers
in the years after world war i.
so we think a lot and we hear a lot about the ripple effects
of conflict after the conflict is over,
but to think about the ripple effects of humanitarian aid
and of peace work generations after that's happened
and I think that's a story that doesn't get told enough.
[music]
narrator: by 1940, it was clear that another major conflict
was brewing in europe.
robert jones, minister of cincinnati friends meeting,
attended a gathering in richmond, indiana,
"for the purpose of,"
as they explained,
"discussing what friends can do in this world of confusion."
he reported that the american friends service committee
was trying to work out, with the government,
some sort of service for the conscientious objectors,
should war come.
the result was "the selective training and service act,
which, included an exemption from combat for any person "who,
"by reason of religious training and belief,
"is conscientiously opposed
to participation in war in any form."
thomas: during world war ii,
federal law restricted the alternative service
of conscientious objectors
to projects within the united states.
so you saw conscientious objectors
who worked as attendants in mental hospitals,
who worked in forestry camps
doing conservation or fire-fighting work.
some of the bravest conscientious objectors
volunteered to be guinea pigs in medical experiments,
testing vaccines for various diseases
or even taking part in starvation experiments
that were aimed at getting a better understanding
of how former pows
or concentration camp survivors could be nursed back to health.
so they were brave in their own way.
narrator: several Quakers from the midwest
took part in these dangerous experiments.
donne: wayne overmeyer
participated as human guinea pigs
in some of these experiments
in world war ii.
david stoffregen was the first Quaker in cincinnati to register
as a co for that war and to sign up for the cps camps.
narrator: another young Quaker by the name of t. canby jones,
was also a co during world war ii.
neil: canby is very, very interesting fellow,
a phd from yale.
he was a conscientious objector and worked with the cos
in norway as well as some places here in the united states
and he's also a biblical scholar.
he was born in japan, his father was a missionary.
his father became the principal or president
of a black university in the south where he was raised
so he's always been on cutting edge in many different ways.
narrator: canby later became a beloved professor
and peace activist at wilmington college in ohio,
where he was known on campus as "mr. Quaker."
barred from sending relief workers to battle zones
during wwii,
one wartime concern
the american friends service committee addressed
was the plight of more than
of being "enemy aliens"
after pearl harbor was attacked in 1941.
entire families were imprisoned in temporary internment camps,
until they could be "relocated"
from the west coast
by the newly created wra or "war relocation authority."
sabrina: within 48 hours of the bombing of pearl harbor
president roosevelt issued an executive order,
that basically rounded up hundreds of japanese americans
that lived on the west coast, and put them in internment camps
identifying them as enemy aliens.
they had to sell their farmlands,
close their businesses,
and they went to these camps
literally with only what they could carry.
they were told that that they had to stay there,
until the military order was lifted,
or rescinded, or modified.
g. raymond booth was a former Quaker pastor,
and had been a former executive secretary of the pacific coast
division of american friends service committee.
he was the first representative of the wra here in cincinnati
and met with members of cincinnati friends meeting,
to discuss his concerns
for helping japanese americans get settled.
narrator: in response, a hostel was established--
temporary quarters-- where japanese americans
could stay until employment
and more permanent living arrangements could be found.
a university of cincinnati dormitory
was leased for use as the hostel.
and booth led by example,
hiring the first internment camp member
to relocate to cincinnati, his secretary, elva shinozaki.
sabrina: cincinnati friends were greatly involved in this,
they would coordinate picnics
with the young japanese americans.
they invited them to come to worship
and about 700 individuals
took advantage of the services offered through the hostel.
several people who lived there felt welcomed enough
by cincinnati friends that they just decided to join the meeting
to become Quakers themselves.
narrator: after the hostel closed,
cincinnati Quakers continued their relationship
with the japanese,
contributing funds to rebuild a friends school in japan
which had been destroyed by bombs.
meanwhile, as it had after wwi,
at the end of wwii the american friends service committee
sent relief workers to help rebuild europe.
one young Quaker who joined that effort was robert "bob" mccoy
who grew up on a farm in southwestern ohio.
donne: then american friends service committee went over
to war-torn europe and began doing the work
of feeding the starving people who were there,
both german and austrian and russian.
I mean, they didn't just go feed the children of allies,
but they fed the children of the enemies.
and bob mccoy worked there for about four years after the war.
narrator: one day, while out driving a truck,
bob's work partner had quite a memorable experience
with a local villager.
donne: as he went along from village to village,
he would stop and pick up people if they were walking
and it looked like he had room,
and so he picked up this elderly man,
gave him a ride to the next village,
and the old man came in on the side of the truck and asked,
"how much do I owe you?"
and the guy, the american friends service committee fellow
said "nothing, this is what we do;
you know, we are here to help."
and the old man glanced up and he saw the Quakers insignia,
and he said, "ah, Quakers, that explains everything."
that was left over because
they remembered what Quakers had done in world war i.
and that makes me think about that saying from william penn,
"let us then try what love will do,"
and I think love given freely during and after world war i
was remembered 50
and 60 years later
and had an impact 50 or 60 years later on your enemies.
I mean that's such a powerful lesson,
and it gives credence and weight to the teachings of christianity
and of Quakerism.
paul: after the war in recognition of this,
friends service committee in england
and the american friends service committee
are awarded a nobel peace prize.
it's international recognition of the alternative to warfare,
that Quakers in their best sense, represent.
[music]
narrator: over the next three decades
the social and political focus of americans
and much of the world,
shifted from europe to the growing civil rights movement
within the united states.
in 1954, five black parents in hillsboro, ohio
brought a lawsuit against the local school board
for its policy of segregation in the schools.
in its ruling on brown vs. the board of education
earlier that year, the u.s. supreme court had
"abolished the 'separate but equal' rule under which
"hillsboro's african american children had been educated
in segregated schools for decades."
the naacp helped provide legal counsel in the hillsboro suit.
"thurgood marshall, who successfully argued
"the brown case, wrote the briefs and signed the petition
submitted to the district court in cincinnati."
one of the parents, imogene curtis,
approached local Quaker meetings
in nearby leesburg and wilmington,
and requested their help.
this was how the freedom schools of hillsboro, ohio,
also known as the
"kitchen schools" began.
rebecca Godfrey's mother was involved with the effort.
rebecca: my dad happened to be serving
on a committee at the time for the yearly meeting
that received the request.
he came home and he informed her
that he had volunteered her to go to hillsboro once a week
and help with the schooling of these children.
so the group of Quaker teachers--
there were four of them--
would go to hillsboro on mondays,
and meet, and work with the children on that day.
and then, they would leave lesson plans
for the mother teachers to carry out
for the rest of the week.
and that's how they became known as the kitchen schools
because a lot of them,
they sat around a kitchen table four or five children.
narrator: during that, lifelong bonds were established
between the black parents and the Quaker teachers.
rebecca: I was at a family reunion with my teenage son
who invited his friend to come.
and his friend is biracial
and I said, "do you have any relations in hillsboro?"
and he goes "i think so.
I think my--"
I said, "imogene and orville curtis, by any chance?"
and he says, "well, my dad was orville curtis
"and he was named after his uncle.
I think that they lived in hillsboro".
and so, here, you know, my mom had worked with ms. imogene
in the kitchen schools and two generations later
her grandson and orville curtis,
her husband's great nephew are best friends.
you know, it makes you kind of proud
that your mom had a part in that.
[music]
narrator: when american involvement in the conflict
in southeast asia escalated, so did Quaker concern.
friends everywhere protested the war.
wilmington college,
under the leadership of Quaker presidents,
became a focus of Quaker activism.
gary kersey, a graduate of wilmington college,
recounts his time at the school
during the peak of demonstrations.
gary: I saw these demonstrations starting to unfold.
I remember there were those who opposed the war
kind of lining up on one side of the sidewalk
and those who were in support of the troops
were on the other side.
and I thought to myself,
you know, I can go back down the back stairs of college hall,
get in my cougar and go to hardy's
and avoid this whole dilemma
as to whether i'm going to be a part of this,
whether i'm going to be for the war
or shall we say against the war.
and I must say that I think I had reached the point in my life
that up 'till that time,
most everybody had been telling me what I ought to do
and what I ought to say and what I ought to feel.
I had a lot of good teachers.
I have wonderful parents,
had a lot of good people telling me what to do.
but here was a case
where I was going to have to make this decision myself.
and I think there's a lot of people out there
that maybe have a certain feeling
but they just don't capture that feeling
because they're afraid of what people will think
that they're not, you know, it's not what it's all about.
narrator: though many people struggled
with how to respond to the war, wilmington college professor,
larry gara and his wife lenna mae did not.
the gara's were involved in a plethora of vigils
and demonstrations during the vietnam war
and were quite familiar with the consequences
of acting upon their beliefs.
larry served multiple prison sentences
for his challenges to the system,
beginning during world war ii.
larry: I was only arrested once during vietnam.
I don't take civil disobedience lightly.
and in 1942 when I was supposed to register
I couldn't do anything else;
it was a matter of conscience.
I publicly announced that I could not,
in good conscience, register and of course when I did that,
when I was 20 years old,
I was sentenced to prison for three years.
narrator: years later, accused of counseling a student
to refuse to register for the draft,
gara was sentenced to prison for another 18 months,
separating him from his wife lenna mae.
lenna mae: we had been married for about five or six years then
and that was kind of difficult, very difficult,
but I was young, he was young,
we were healthy, and we got through it.
larry: i've regret a lot of things i've done
but I never regretted refusing to register.
I think it was absolutely the right thing to do
and still feel that way.
narrator: throughout the vietnam war,
Quakers everywhere held peace vigils,
and in may 1970, cincinnati and wilmington friends
joined other religious groups in protesting the killing
of four kent state university students
by the ohio national guard.
current cincinnati friends member, jim crocker-lakness,
was a student at kent state.
he remembers that morning.
jim: the guard moved into the fenced in area
and found themselves blocked, couldn't move.
so there was a moment of back and forth between,
about eight to ten of us, in the parking lot.
the national guard would shoot their tear gas
and we were able to run down wind of the tear gas
and pick it up and throw it back.
and then I found myself-- I had picked up a rock
and I found my arm cocked ready to throw this rock
and time stood still.
the universe vanished and I heard jesus say,
"jim are you sure you want to do that?
drop that rock and follow me."
and so my conscientious objection to war
and non-violence based on the teachings of jesus,
came back to me and I did drop the rock.
narrator: another influential Quaker actively involved
in following the peace testimony was wallace collett,
a wwii conscientious objector from wilmington, ohio.
after graduating from wilmington college,
collett moved to cincinnati,
where he became a prominent businessman and civic leader.
and eventually became chairman
of the american friends service committee.
paul: wallace was upfront,
out in the open with his war tax resistance.
every year he would fill out his 1040
and he'd get to the bottom and he'd write a note
and attach it, telling the irs that he had not paid x dollars
because he considered them to be dollars
that supported the military.
but then he went on and he would tell them
"i have deposited that amount of money
"plus whatever you know
"that I know you are going to assess
"plus any interest that might be due.
I put it all in this bank account."
he'd give them the bank name and the account number
so they could go and get that money.
so he was going to resist the taxes.
he knew that they were going to want it
and he wasn't gonna try to stop them from getting it.
in fact he ended up paying more because he knew they were
going to assess penalties and interest on it.
all that money was in the bank, but then he did something else.
this is the good part.
he knew the presidents of most of the banks in cincinnati,
maybe all the banks in cincinnati.
he would open an account at the bank, put the money in,
but then he'd make an appointment
with the president of the bank
and he would go in and he'd say, "hi al, how are you doing?
"it's good to see you.
"listen the irs is going to come
and they are going to seize my account."
well, you can imagine the shock that this would cause.
I mean, this is a permanent person in our community
and he is telling me as the president of the bank
that they are going to come and seize his assets.
and so of course what do I do as the president?
I said why, what's going on?
and wallace would then have the opportunity to tell them
about what war taxes represented,
why they were wrong and what he was doing to resist them.
it gave him an opportunity to minister to prominent people,
people with power and authority in the business community
and I just think that's just such a tremendous example
for all of us.
narrator: over the years, others like jim crocker-lakness
faced difficult choices related to the peace testimony.
such was the situation of ryan myers
during desert storm in 1990.
but after some guidance from fellow friend
and conscientious objector, charlie pierson,
myers was more confident in his decision.
ryan: looking at having to register for selective service,
that I was not going to.
so charlie pearson, who was a member of the meeting
I was a co during wwii,
was a bit of mentor for me when I was young.
I think I took some strength from that
knowing that, okay I know charlie and I respect charlie.
he was able to do it, he was okay.
of course, when I was making the decision
I knew it carried potential legal consequences.
the possibility of a pretty substantial fine,
prison time, and i'm not eligible for student loans.
but I think it was the right decision for me.
I think if the circumstances were the same
i'd make the decision again.
[music]
narrator: in recent years, some Quakers have,
as their predecessors did,
focused on projects to provide education equality.
with the support of her local friends meeting,
cincinnati Quaker cathy barney has put her energy
into an arts program for underprivileged children.
cathy: I started it because I just knew that there were kids
in my neighborhood
that didn't have the options and opportunities
that the average kid has,
yet these kids were just as valuable.
I hope to provide a safe place for these kids,
I hope it sparks something in them.
that maybe an area or opportunity would open up
that they hadn't seen before.
donovan: it's just a way to be creative
and get your hands dirty.
mckenzee: we painted stuff and we got like one of those hats
that the artists wear.
cathy: some of the kids have told me
they really like to come here because it gets them
away from the daily drama where they live.
angel: I keep coming back because sometimes
when I like have a bad day, this is the only place I can go to
and it like makes me feel better about myself.
I miss cathy and miss pat and all of them teaching me
the important responsibilities and stuff in life.
cathy: I think it really gives them a voice, self expression.
if these kids have a venue for self expression
then they know who they are,
they have a voice and they can say no to bad influences,
they know who they are.
I think it makes them stronger.
donovan: if I would learn something,
it would be how to help people
and teach people how to do the art stuff.
angel: i'm just like a different person,
like i'm more mature and I know how to handle situations better.
cathy: I think one of the Quaker principles
that has always spoken to me is seeing that of God in others
and being able to see that of God in these kids
and helping them to see that in themselves.
I mean, I think that's, sort of, in a nutshell,
what the whole point is.
narrator: also supported by cincinnati friends meeting,
luke and angela ebner express their faith
through work with inner city youth,
exposing them to organic and sustainable gardening,
"planting seeds of hope."
luke: the kids that work with us
get to learn how to plant plants,
harvest, market, cook organic fruits and vegetables
that are all grown right here.
I always say we're planting nourishing habitats
for our community.
so this is a nourishing habitat that I get to cultivate
with the youth that we interact with.
robert: living in an urban community it's really hard
to have that time of mediation and peace
because there's always so much going on.
and this is a highly populated area.
so being in a secluded area like gardening,
it brings you a peace that you never even knew existed.
and it's truly a blessing to be able to grow food
and to just be out because putting your hands at work
and really allow your mind to meditate and just flow
and losing yourself while being in the grass
or tending to the plants or whatnot
you really get the opportunity to think.
rashawn: life outside the garden is much like a challenge.
it's much like working at the garden.
like I said, putting forth effort to do anything you want
takes practice, hard work, and dedication.
robert: there was a time in my life when I had nowhere to go.
and I had to come to this garden and luke gave me a job,
he made sure I had money in my pocket,
he made sure it was enough for me to help support my family.
this garden means everything to me, truly.
what i've learned about equality while working here
at the eco garden is that we all are in the same boat,
no one is better than no one else.
even though someone might have better clothes
or might have a better career or better options
or opportunities, at the end of the day
we're all human beings with the same faults and issues.
at the end of the day, we're all afraid of the same things.
so truly there's no point in seeing anyone above you
or below you, there's no point of insecurity
because we're all in the same boat,
we're all scared of the same thing,
we all seek the same thing.
narrator: public friend and minister, donne hayden,
believes that several things particularly attract people
to Quakerism: social activism
and the affirmation that there is "that of God in everyone"
which includes the understanding
that anyone may be led or guided by God.
donne: we attract people who are deeply involved
and socially conscious and committed to social justice.
but the other kind of person is a person who is tuned in
and listening and can hear,
or can be led and so finds themselves among others
who are of similar leading.
julie: for me, for my family, that component of equality
has been a large piece of what has kept us here.
rachel: Quakerism has really helped us
focus ourselves outwards,
because you can see the effect that it has on everybody else
and you feel like you're contributing to society
and helping others.
judy: Quakers believe that each of us has the responsibility
to become a minister
and to minister each in our own way to the community
and to the wider world as well.
jeff: my attraction to Quakerism has always been on the side
of the experiential approach to religion,
that you have an immediate experience
of the presence of the spirit
and out of that grows your values and your commitments.
rebecca: it is just discovering that you can have an actual
one-on-one relationship with your creator and that you can
know the joy and the peace,
and the beauty that God created us to know.
narrator: through more than three centuries,
Quakers everywhere-- famous and anonymous,
in east coast city and midwestern countryside--
have heeded george fox's admonition
to "answer that of God in everyone."
thomas: if it were proper for Quakers to be proud,
I think we're entitled to be proud for the many ways
that we've worked to try to make the world a better place
and particularly focused on people who were marginalized
and disenfranchised by the larger society.
and I hope that's something that will always be true of friends,
that we will always be willing to be counter-cultural,
not for the sake of being odd
or just for the sake of being different,
but because by running counter to the larger culture
and its values, we ultimately move it toward being
a better, more just, more radically fair world.
